---
title:  "Publications"
layout: archive
permalink: /pubs/
author_profile: true
comments: false
---

## Journal Publications:
<details>
  <summary>
    The PRIMPING routine — Tiling through proximal alternating linearized minimization <br>
    <i>Sibylle Hess, Katharina Morik, and Nico Piatkowski @ Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (DAMI) 2017</i>
  </summary>
  <p>
  The Primping Routine introduces a novel optimization procedure for the combinatorial problem of Boolean Matrix Factorization (BMF), based on recent advances in nonconvex optimization. The proposed procedure has been the first to enable the highly parallel implementation of a BMF algorithm on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), replacing the so far used heuristic procedures. Furthermore, a minimum description length based criterion is introduced which enables an accurate automatic determination of the number of clusters. The introduced proximal operator for binary optimization has been extended for integer optimization in the scope of estimating exponential families 
<a href="https://eldorado.tu-dortmund.de/bitstream/2003/36877/1/Dissertation_Piatkowski.pdf">(Piatkowski, 2018)</a>.
   </p>
</details>
[arXiV](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.09722){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--small} [publication](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10618-017-0508-z){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}

## Conference Publications:

<details>
  <summary> 
   k is the Magic Number — Inferring the Number of Clusters Through Nonparametric Concentration Inequalities <br>
    <i>Sibylle Hess, and Wouter Duivesteijn @ ECML PKDD 2019</i>
  </summary>
  <p>
    This paper extends the idea of <i>the trustworthy pal</i> to select clusters based on the probability that a cluster is generated by noise effects to 
    clusters in the real-valued vector space computed by <i>k</i>-means. Here, me and my co-author have proposed a bound on the question whether a 
    cluster is likely to be part of another, overarching cluster. For real-valued clustering, comparable probability bounds exist, but only for specific 
    (e.g., Gaussian) distributions of points within one cluster. Our novel bound does not require assumptions of specific probability distribution and 
    relies only on easily computed parameters of the data, such as the mean and variance of points within each cluster. This makes our novel approach 
    suitable for the application of clustering methods which work on a transformation of the input data such as <i>SpectACl</i>.
  </p>
</details>
[arXiV](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02343){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--small} [publication](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-46150-8_16){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}
<details>
  <summary> 
    The SpectACl of nonconvex clustering: a spectral approach to density-based clustering <br> 
    <i> Sibylle Hess, Wouter Duivesteijn, Philipp Honysz, and Katharina Morik @ AAAI 2019</i>
  </summary> 
  <p>
    This paper fills a long standing theoretical gap, showing why the application of $k$-means in Spectral Clustering is not only practically but also 
    theoretically justified. This insight led to the proposal of a novel robust and feasible algorithm <i>SpectACl</i>. <i>SpectACl</i> is able to 
    outperform more advanced and theoretically more expressive approaches which learn the similarity matrix simultaneously with the clustering.
  </p>
</details>
[arXiV](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.00680){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--small} [publication](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4265){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}
<details>
  <summary>
    The trustworthy pal: Controlling the false discovery rate in boolean matrix factorization <br>
    <i> Sibylle Hess, Nico Piatkowski, and Katharina Morik @ SDM 2018 </i> 
  </summary>
  <p>
    In this paper, we provide the first criterion to determine the number of clusters in BMF based on probability theory. We have provided a
    probabilistic bound on the question "Given my data has <i>p\%</i> noise, how likely is this cluster (returned by my method of choice) mainly 
    composed of noise?". This approach certifies the returned clustering in the sense that any of the clusters is only with a small (user-defined)
    probability an artifact of noise.
  </p>
</details>
[arXiV](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.00697){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--small} [publication](https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611975321.46){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}
<details>
  <summary>C-salt: Mining class-specific alterations in boolean matrix factorization <br>
    <i>Sibylle Hess and Katharina Morik @ ECML PKDD </i>
  </summary>
    <p>
      <i>C-SALT</i> presents a novel matrix factorization scheme which reveals the clustering structure subject to given classes. 
      <i>C-Salt</i> provides  answers to the question: "Given samples of various classes in the binary feature space, what are the features 
      which define clusters stretching over multiple classes and how do these clusters change within a particular class?" 
      The optimization for the novel BMF scheme, answering this question, relies on the method established in the primping routine. 
      <i>C-Salt</i> has proven particularly useful in the application of medical domains. The development of personalised medicine requires models 
      which can do both: identifying groups of patients, sharing  genomic traits, together with the alterations of these traits which discriminate 
      those developing a particular disease from those who do not.
  </p>
 </details>
[arXiV](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.09907){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--small} [publication](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-71249-9_33){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}

## Books
<details>
  <summary>
    A Mathematical Theory of Making Hard Decisions: Model Selection and Robustness of Matrix Factorization with Binary Constraints <br>
    <i>Sibylle Hess, 2018</i>
  </summary>
  <p>This is my dissertation which contains a survey about matrix factorizations subject to binary constraints and the connections to popular clustering methods. In this scope, I present my work on the <i>Primping Routine</i>, <i>Spectacl</i>, <i>The Trustworthy Pal</i> and <i>C-Salt</i>. Big shout-out to the <a> href="https://sfb876.tu-dortmund.de/index.html">SFB 876</a>@TU Dortmund and my supervisor Katharina Morik.</p>
</details>
[publication](https://eldorado.tu-dortmund.de/bitstream/2003/38270/1/DissHess.pdf){: .btn .btn--success .btn--small}
